## Results {.page_break_before}

Hackmd for tables here: https://hackmd.io/GvngZ4gHQE-9ERB4Gd71HQ

Note assumptions:

* reference genomes are correct
* we are not trying to generalize - this is just about looking things up

Overall messages to pick from, in order of CTB pref:

* It is hard to do genome-resolved analysis from metagenomes (but easy
  to do highly specific taxonomic resolution with just k-mers). AND Genome
  resolved analysis is probably important for strain resolved analysis.
* FracMinHash-based measures (hash specificity, hash unicity distance)
  provide valuable information that highlight genomes and taxonomic
  units that are hard to classify with any approach; these genomes
  and taxonomic units are where to focus on improvements, because the rest
  are easy.
* short reads have limited capability / correspond well to hashes; long reads do not seem to add significant capability. (THIS ARGUMENT NEEDS TO BE SHARPENED)
* sourmash works well because of combinatorics automatically picking discriminatory hashes.
* NCBI is more confused than GTDB.

Challenges:

* FracMinHash has false negatives, so we have to be careful about conclusions about what k-mers _cannot_ do.
* Do we want to make this (mostly) about FracMinHash, or not? Could make title "Practical limits in resolving species and genomes from metagenomic data with FracMinHash" :) and/or parameter tuning for FracMinHash.

### Many individual hashes are genome specific, but not all genomes have perfectly informative hashes

We first ask, if we see a hash from the reference database in a
metagenome, what is the likelihood of that hash being specific to a
genome? And how many genomes have hashes that uniquely identify that
genome?

Consider a collection of the size of GTDB - 320,000 genomes with
an average size of 5e6 bp. In the simplest case where these genomes
were completely random and had neither bias nor redundancy, 
most 31-mers present in one genome should be distinct to that genome.
Thus the presence of any one k-mer in a sequencing data set
should be capable of perfectly distinguishing that genome's presence
even in low-coverage data sets
(Appendix A).

In practice, genomes are neither unbiased nor contain distinct
content.  In order to analyze 300k genomes at scale, we used
FracMinHash. At reasonable parameters (S=10,000, k=31) we generated a
representative collection of hashes and found that 15378449 of
22792206 hashvals (67.5%) in GTDB rs207 are perfectly informative at
genome level.

These 15.4m perfectly discriminating hashes are not equally
distributed across genomes, however. Of the 318k genomes in GTDB
rs207, 149k (47.1%) of the genomes contain a hash that
perfectly identifies that genome; the remaining 52.9% of genomes
cannot be unambiguously identified due to the presence of any single hash.

Inspection of these genomes using all k-mers confirms that, in
general, a lack of discriminating hashes for FracMinHash=10,000 means
that there are fewer than 10,000 distinguishing k-mers present in the
genome (e.g. see
[results for `s__Bosea`](https://github.com/ctb/2022-sourmash-sens-spec/issues/6)). That
is, the FracMinHash results provide an approximate upper bound on the
number of distinguishing k-mers

Conclusion of this results section (to go into discussion): it is not
easy to identify individual genomes based on k-mers alone, and doing so
would/will require making distinctions between genomes based on very small
fractions of k-mers.
This has significant implications for sensitivity and specificity of
k-mer based techniques.

### Most species do have perfectly informative hashes.

We next ask, if we see a k-mer from the reference database in a
metagenome, what is the likelihood that we can uniquely pinpoint a
specific taxonomic unit's presence?

Using GTDB, we calculate that 6.2% of k-mers are not species
specific, and 0.9% of k-mers are neither species, family, or genus
specific (Table @tbl:gtdb-entropy).  That is, 99.1% of hashes uniquely
identify a specific family within the GTDB taxonomy.

| Taxonomic level (GTDB) | # perfectly informative hashes | cumulative total % |
| -------- | -------- | -------- |
| species | 21,150,287 | 92.8% |
| genus | 1,262,281 | 98.3% |
| family | 170,249 | 99.1% |
| order and above | 209,389 | 0.9% |

Table: Entropy measurements for GTDB taxonomy using 318k genomes from
rs207 genomes. {#tbl:gtdb-entropy}

There are 73 genera (of 16686) with no perfectly identifying hashes,
and 8 families (of 4107), and 4 orders (out of 1593). However many of
these (all of these? :) are pathological cases where there are very
few genomes at the given taxonomic rank. CTB: fix these numbers to
reflect some of the weird edge cases we found :)

Conclusion of this results section for discussion: it is straightforward
to do taxonomic identification of sequencing data within the GTDB taxonomy.

### Taxonomies vary in their k-mer specificity

We can also calculate these numbers for the same genomes using the
NCBI taxonomy instead of the GTDB taxonomy. Table @tbl:ncbi-entropy
uses the NCBI taxonomy with the same genomes used above.  Here we see
that approximately 4.5% of hashes cannot be used to distinguish
between different _families_
- a full 5 times as many as with the GTDB taxonomy.  These 1.0 million
hashes represent approximately 10 billion k-mers, or approximately
2,000 bacterial genomes worth of sequence.

| Taxonomic level (NCBI) | # perfectly informative hashes | cumulative total % |
| -------- | -------- | -------- |
| species | 20,744,791 | 91.0% |
| genus | 779,234 | 94.4% |
| family | 245,718 | 95.5% |
| order and above | 1,022,463 | 4.5% |

Table: Entropy measurements for same 318k GTDB rs207 genomes as in
Table @tbl:gtdb-entropy, but using NCBI taxonomic
labels. {#tbl:ncbi-entropy}

CTB: check NCBI results.

CTB: provide tax results for NCBI.

Conclusion of this results section for discussion: this is a way to evaluate
taxonomies.  Do we have a good argument for why k=31 should be specific to
species/genus? Or is this empirical?

* Can we link to ANI / hash relatedness work?
* can we calculate k-mer size vs ANI?

### Many genomes cannot be uniquely distinguished based on combinations of hashes

From the results above, of the 318k genomes in GTDB rs207, only 149k
(47.1%) of the genomes can be identified by considering individual
hashes - each of the remaining 52.9% genomes have no hashes that are
unique to that genome.

K-mers can be further ranked based on *how much* discriminatory power they
offer - for example, a k-mer that is only present in two genomes in the
collection is much more informative than a k-mer present in 20. One way to
formalize this is with Shannon entropy (formula, base 2).

| # genomes containing | H (Shannon entropy) | # hashes | % total |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -- |
| 1 | 0 | 15,378,449 | 67.5% |
| 2 | 1 | 3,407,595 | 15.0% |
| 3 | 1.58 | 1,337,246 | 5.9%|
| 4 | 2 | 694,687 | 3.0% |
| 5 or more | >= 2.32 | 1,974,229 | 8.7% |

Table: Distribution of 31-mers among distinct genomes in GTDB rs207,
estimated with FracMinHash (scaled=10,000). {#tbl:genome-entropy}

When we measure the Shannon entropy of hashes, we see that more than
80% of hashes are in only two genomes, and 90% of hashes are contained
in four or fewer genomes.  This suggests that combinations of
hashes could be used to identify specific genomes.

So we next ask how many genomes can be distinguished from each other
using a combinatorial collection of hashes?  To do this, we estimate
the _unicity distance_ of each genome in the database, where the
unicity distance is defined as the smallest set of hashes capable of
uniquely identifying an individual genome. (k=31, scaled=10,000)

Table @tbl:unicity shows that approximately 29.2% of the genomes in
GTDB rs207 cannot be distinguished uniquely by _any_ combination of
31-mer hashes at a scaled of 10,000.

Comparing with informative k-mer results above, we see that 47.1% of
genomes can be classified with a single hash, and 29.2% cannot be
classified with _any_ combination of hashes. So combinatorial
approaches like sourmash gather can resolve an additional 23.7% of
genomes beyond single hashes, but not more.

| Unicity distance | Number of genomes | Percent of genomes |
| -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 1     | 48,630     | 15.3%     |
| infinite | 92,564 | 29.2% | 

Table: Estimated unicity distances with hashes for 318k GTDB rs207
genomes using FracMinHash as implemented in sourmash (k=31,
scaled=10,000). {#tbl:unicity}

(CTB: calculate for unicity 2, and 3.)

Taxonomic summarization confirms that most infinite unicity genomes are
at species level or below. (CTB: link/connect to previous results above.)

(Do we want to calculate scaled=1 k-mer unicity in this section?)

Conclusions for discussion:

* sourmash/FracMinHash can perfectly distinguish most species based on combinations of hashes
* the value of gather here is that it automatically uses discriminatory hashes without any taxonomy-aware preprocessing. should be even more valuable at low scaled. Can apply to any containment based approach!
* this will not necessarily work for pinpointing specific genomes / strain resolution!

### Implications for short-read mapping

Since FracMinHash results typically correspond nicely to short-read
mapping, the above results suggest that short-reads may struggle to
distinguish between many closely related genomes.

TODO:

* distinguish between "just" using end-to-end alignment vs calculating
  detailed SNP/SVs (which is coverage dependent, will decrease sensitivity)
* show for select pairs of genomes that short-read mapping approaches struggle, and/or that they match containment.

### Implications for long-read mapping

* should be very effective
* can use fracminhash etc to identify likely genomes once over 5kb

Challenges in long-read mapping approaches:

* may be too specific / lose sensitivity to genome rearrangements?


### Other TODO:

* flesh out theoretical/simulation results
* can we / should we link any of the above to ANI?
* do we want to look at all Genbank? ick.

### LEFTOVER TEXT BELOW

(What is value of H here, exactly? Other than H=0? Link to taxonomy, and
combinatorics; also see unicity distance at bottom.)

We measured the species distribution in GTDB rs207 for 21.2 million
hashes, representing 212 billion 31-mers, and calculated the Shannon
entropy for each hash (equationXX) at the species, genus, and family
levels. 


### Shannon entropy can summarize the taxonomic cohesion of taxonomies based on genomic relationships.

We can also calculate the Shannon entropy with respect to different
taxonomies.

### Unicity distance can be used to estimate genomic redundancy

Of the 318k genomes in GTDB rs207, only 149k (47.1%) of the genomes
can be identified by considering individual k-mers - each of the remaining
52.9% genomes have no k-mers that are unique to that genome.  Suppose
we use _combinations_ of k-mers to identify genome presence/absence?

We next ask, how many genomes can be distinguished from each other
using a combinatorial collection of k-mers?  To do this, we estimate
the _unicity distance_ of each genome in the database, where the
unicity distance is defined as the smallest set of hashes capable of
uniquely identifying an individual genome. (k=31, scaled=10,00)

Table @tbl:unicity shows that approximately 29.2% of the genomes in
GTDB rs207 cannot be distinguished uniquely by _any_ combination of
31-mers at a scaled of 10,000.

Comparing with informative k-mer results above, we see that 47.1% of
genomes can be classified with a single hash, and 29.2% cannot be
classified with _any_ combination of hashes. So combinatorial
approaches like sourmash gather can resolve an additional 23.7% of
genomes beyond single hashes, but not more.

(Compare also with k-mer informativeness; can we tie entropy
computation at top back to number of genomes with unicity of 1,
and cross validate?)
 
| Unicity distance | Number of genomes | Percent of genomes |
| -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 1     | 48,630     | 15.3%     |
| infinite | 92,564 | 29.2% | 

Table: Estimated unicity distances with hashes for 318k GTDB rs207
genomes using FracMinHash as implemented in sourmash (k=31,
scaled=10,000). {#tbl:unicity}

(FIX table above ;))

### The large majority of taxa can be distinguished by combinations of k-mers

Suppose we sequence a genome completely as part of a metagenome. Are
there any taxonomic units whose presence cannot be precisely
determined using a combination of k-mers?

Out of 65,703 species in GTDB rs207, 64,620 (95.7%) can be detected by
a combination of k-mers.

But:

- at rank species, there are 1083 taxa with infinite unicity, out of total of 65703
- at rank genus, there are 73 taxa with infinite unicity, out of total of 16686
- at rank family, there are 8 taxa with infinite unicity, out of total of 4107
- at rank order, there are 4 taxa with infinite unicity, out of total of 1593

In this case, we see that there are a small number of taxa whose
presence cannot be determined based solely on the basis of
combinations of k-mers.  This is usually because there are very few
members of that taxon in the database; for example, of the ~1000 species
with infinite unicity, 977 have only two members.

This means that no matter the data, presence of these 1083 species cannot be
uniquely determined with (e.g.) sourmash.

(Analyze further. Fix k-mer results above.)

### Implications for read mapping and (pseudo)alignment

Infinite unicity at a scaled=10,000 implies that genomes cannot be distinguished via pseudoalignment of reads under 10kb in length

Arguments to make and evaluate:

* genomes that are identical with gather cannot be distinguished based
  on end-to-end alignment of reads - you have to look at the actual
  alignment. This means pseudoalignment cannot distinguish them.
  Maybe call these "infinite unicity groups"?
* genomes that have infinite unicity across a collection of other genomes
  at a given scaled value cannot easily be distinguished by end-to-end
  read mapping.
* this implies that SNPs or small SVs will need to be used to
  distinguish between these genomes.

Regardless, all genomes and taxa _but_ these are easily distinguishable with
combinations of k-mer.

---

