## Discussion {.page_break_before}

Automatic selection of discriminating k-mers through combinatorics is one
reason why sourmash performs so well.

Foreword to Discussion or Conclusion, or maybe end of Introduction -

Microbial bioinformatics is increasingly challenged by an abundance of
closely related genomes, which has led in turn to pangenomics. The
features of archaeal and bacterial genomes include considerations such
as open and closed pangenomes, along with a seemingly endless
diversity of accessory elements and a highly conserved set of core
genes. The subject of this study is how the _genomic_ structure of
pangenomes, as represented in reference databases, affects
reference-based interpretation of metagenomic data.

The key perspectives we bring to this work are as follows: we are
facing a substantial over-abundance of genome sequences, and there is
an increasing interest in using them to interpret metagenomic data at
the strain or individual genomic level. This, in turn, is made
considerably more difficult by the empirical observation that the vast
majority of shared nucleotide sequence is present at and below the
species level.  Here we focus on evaluating and measuring the extent
to which species and genomes can be identified at the nucleotide
level, using both single k-mers and k-mers in combination.

We also show that human-constructed taxonomies both simplify and
complicate matters: while they provide helpful resolution up to a point,
they also complicate tool development and design. Taxonomic benchmarks
on their own may not be a useful way forward.  (Unload sourmash perspective.
Discuss contamination here too.)

We model things as a database lookup problem where we assume that the
right match is in the database, and the challenge is distinguishing
them in the face of the actual structure in the database. For this
study we explicitly ignore questions of sensitivity across sequence
divergence as well as errors in the database sequences, e.g. incorrect
sequence or contamination.

### Species-level classification of sequencing data is straightforward with k-mers

* Taxonomic classification of sequencing data is statistically
  straightforward with long k-mers. You can easily achieve high
  sensitivity and high precision/recall.
* Most species can be identified by the presence of a single k-mer
  from any genome within that species.
* Most k-mers in the reference database identify a species, a genus,
  or a family.
  
### Genome-based classification of sequencing data with k-mers is more challenging.

* We use genomes instead of strains because if you can identify genomes
  presumably you can identify strains, and strains are conceptually
  challenging. This is basically the hardest version of the problem!
* A full 47.3% of genomes in the database can be readily identified at a
  low level of sequencing by using individual hashes. Yay!
* Another 23.7% of genomes can be identified by using hashes in combination
  with each other.
* However, the remaining 23.7% of genomes are not that different from
  other genomes in the database - we can put a hard constraint of <
  10k unique k-mers on each of them, or less than 2% of the k-mers in
  the genome!
  
### Mapping reads to genomes suffers from similar challenges

* We use k-mers to identify challenging genomes for mapping. This
  works for two reasons: first, k-mers are more stringent than
  mapping, so provide an upper bound; and second, if you can use k-mers,
  you don't need to use mapping.
* We evaluate end-to-end alignment of reads to reference genomes
  and show that, without consideration of SNPs or SVs, many genomes
  are hard to distinguish with read mapping.
* We do not consider SNPs and SVs here because reliably calling them
  from sequencing data requires higher coverage data and is relatively
  challenging (and subject to many false positives).
* Long reads do not necessarily solve problems for the 23.7% of genomes
  that cannot easily be distinguished by k-mers.
  
### Different taxonmies confound things.

* The Nask et al. paper from 2018 is largely a commentary on two
  things: too short a k-mer size for individual k-mers, and how
  "bad" taxonomies can mess things up.
* Measuring k-mer specificity as above is a simple way to evaluate taxonomies.
* GTDB is a nicer, simpler taxonomy.
* NCBI taxonomy causes more problems.
* New organizational schemes such as LINS may be better, but other things
  may come into play - contamination and lateral gene transfer. Out of scope
  of this work.
* Organizing things taxonomically helps when you just need species-level
  classification but hurts when you care about genome-level classification.
  
### Reduced-representation databases are not good.

* Reduced-representation/non-redundant databases such as used in (many
  programs) are not good when you want strain level analysis. You end up
  omitting sequence that may be important functionally.
* We should use all available data and sort through it afterwards.
* Several approaches (sourmash, ganon, shei wen) for doing this.

### Sourmash works well up to a point.

* We were motivated to explore the above because of sourmash high
  recall and precision in long read paper.
* Sourmash works well because it automatically finds discriminatory
  k-mers.
* But sourmash will fail to classify the 23.7% of genomes above with
  default parameters.
* These genomes are not readily distinguishable by read mapping, either.
* This is an interesting challenge for future classifier benchmarks.

### LEFTOVER TEXT

### Species-level classification should be straightforward with k-mers

Taxonomic classification to the species level is straightforward,
largely because GTDB taxonomy is closely tied to genomic content and
most of the genomic redundancy lies within species and genus
level. Thus GTDB taxonomy largely encapsulates this redundancy. The
entropy measurements demonstrate that it is possible to choose an
informative subset of k-mers that would robustly classify at the
species level, and that doing so would not compromise sensitivity.
LCA-style approaches such as those used by Kraken should work even if
we use genus and family level k-mers, while eliminating those above.

Shared genomic content at higher levels confounds taxonomic
classification methods. While surely some shared genomic content is
real, our analysis suggests that significant portions of it are
contamination.

### Classification below the strain level

Detecting genomes from sequences is easy with k-mers, but
significant redundancy prevents straightforward classification to the
genome/strain level. Here leveraging combinatorial application of
k-mers provides significant leverage; this is how sourmash achieves
high precision. Nonetheless sourmash cannot distinguish a full 30% of
the genomes in the database from each other.

Some implications are that it should be possible to use information
from both short and long reads to classify robustly to the species
level, but it is unlikely to work below that (at the strain level).
This is because many reads will map to shared content within a species,
and some of that shared content may not distinguish a particular
genome from others in the pangenome at the resolution of the available
reads.

A simple thought experiment also suggests that reduced-representation
/slimmed-down databases will not support strain-level classification.
Suppose that a technique exists that can classify reads to a strain
level.  First, choose a read that belongs to two or more different
strains; there is no way to identify which strain this belongs
to. Second, choose a read that belongs to a strain that is not
represented in the database; while it clearly belongs to a known
species, there is no way to identify which. Classifiers should be
using all available information and it is clearly possible to do so,
viz sourmash.

(Probably need to spend some time here talking about core vs accessory
genomes.)

Approaches such as sourmash can try to operate "above" individual
k-mers, but will also be stymied by infinite unicity. Here combinatorial
uses of k-mers (via e.g. containment) may be able to resolve strains,
but will need to do so at higher resolution than sourmash's current
parameters. Here approaches such as Agamemnon may be useful.

### A method to evaluate, compare, and study taxonomic lables

The GTDB and NCBI taxonomies are not entirely consonant and our
studies using entropy suggest that a substantial portion of the NCBI
taxonomy is confused. Comparing Table @tbl:gtdb-entropy and Table
@tbl:ncbi-entropy, we see that 5x as many k-mers belong to genomes
that do not share the same family-level labels.  This difference is
due solely to the taxonomic labels. It is not necessarily surprising
that NCBI is so different since GTDB is directly constructed using
content-based phylogeny, but it does suggest that there are many
places where the NCBI taxonomy should be examined closely.

(drill down; contamination, etc.)

K-mers are not the problem; taxonomy is.

### Combinatorial approaches may minimize the impact of contamination and taxonomy

Maybe sourmash gather does a good job of picking out genome based on
contextual clues?

Sourmash gather doesn't need to pick good k-mers a priori - it uses all
of them in combination. But the key one(s) are the unique ones.

### Shannon entropy and unicity on k-mers are robust ways to study, evaluate, and summarize large databases

Exploration of these results suggest that k-mer size and scaled do not
dramatically affect our conclusions. (Confirm me, please :).

## Conclusion



This is easy mode: this kind of taxonomic classification is "just" a
database lookup.  What messes up taxonomic classification with k-mers
is (1) biology (redundancy and laterally transferred genetic elements)
and (2) humans (taxonomy). (1) is resolvable to a significant extent
with combinatorics. (2) can be tackled with better metrics and
systematic improvement. Here we provide measures that assist with
both.

Despite this, biological questions remain that are out of scope of
this paper: correctness and completeness of reference databases matters.
And we really also say nothing about generalizability, where we know
that we have problems.
