## Appendix {.page_break_before}

### Appendix A - Individual k-mers are very sensitive to even low coverage genomes

### Appendix B - Combinatorial k-mers can resolve genomes even at low k-mer sizes.

### Appendix C - FracMinHash sketching can be modeled as a Poisson process

We can model the FracMinHash sketch algorithm as follows: for a stream
of randomly generated k-mers (with k sufficiently large that the k-mers
are effectively sampled without replacement (e.g. k=21)), FracMinHash
with scaled=S adds hashes to the sketch at an average rate of one in every S
k-mers.

The process of adding hashes to the sketch is a Poisson process, since
for any given number of k-mers a discrete non-negative number of
k-mers will be retained in the sketch, the events occur independently,
and at most one k-mer is hashed at each time point.

Thus the distribution of output sketch sizes for a given number of
input k-mers M is a Poisson distribution with lambda=M/S.

For genome comparison purposes, we want to know the average runlength
of k-mers for which no hashes will be retained; this will inform the
choice of the scaled parameter S for sensitively detecting overlaps of
a size M k-mers. The average runlength can be easily be evaluated for
random sequences (or, in genomic parlance, high complexity /
non-repetitive genomic sequence) by calculating the probability of
generating a sketch of size 0 given M k-mers.

Using Poisson statistics, this is:

Poisson(k=0, lambda=M / S) =  exp(- M / S)

Then the probability of _at least_ one hash being generated for a collection
of k-mers M in size is:

1 - exp(-M / S)

and we see that this matches empirical observations using sourmash. (CTB
insert notebook results.)

Here we note that the distribution of lengths of k-mer runs with zero
hashes is dependent only on S, and independent of any genome
size. This is what we would expect from a memoryless process such as
FracMinHash sketching with a good hash fnuction.

### Appendix D - Limits on genome differences for genomes with identical hash collections

Now consider two genomes A and B, identical in size, with identical
FracMinHash sketches.  Suppose we want to choose the minimum scaled
value S necessary to guarantee a maximum difference between the k-mers
in A and B?  Or, to rephrase: what S is sufficient to assert that A
and B share _more than_ a specific fraction f (say, 99.9%) of their
k-mers?

This is equivalent to asking the question: for genomes with N distinct
k-mers what is the scaled value S such that for 99.9% of those
genomes, all runs of k-mers longer than 1% of N that is not sketched?
(CTB: This needs to be connected to "runs" of k-mers from the genome
somehow.)

For this, we take the equation

p = exp(- fN / S)

and solve for S, which yields:

S = - fN / log(p)

Choosing N=5e6 (a typical genome size for bacteria) and setting p =
.001 and f = 0.01, we find S=7238.
